wizard.rst, before:

===============
The When Wizard
===============

The **When Wizard** is a suite of utilities that aim at providing an easier
user interface for a rich subset of **When**'s capabilities, in order to
give to end users with lesser interest in programming and scripting the
possibility to use the **When** scheduler to perform simple but useful
tasks. In fact, the use of **When** as it is assumes a certain knowledge
of the command shell, including its constructs and peculiarities, which is
somehow in contrast with the GUI nature of the applet itself.

.. Warning::

  This section refers to software in its early development stage: it may
  contain bugs and errors, and it might be subject to changes in both
  appearance and functionality. The documentation will be kept as updated
  as possible, however there might be a gap sometimes between updates to
  the software and related documentation changes.

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_wiz01.png

As the name suggests, the main **When Wizard** application presents itself
with a *wizard* styled interface, which allows to define what has to be done
and the circumstances under which it has to happen in a more intuitive
step-by-step fashion. **When** is still used to do most of the job, that is
scheduling checks, listening to events and performing tasks when the
conditions are met, but the wizard instructs it on how to behave instead
of requiring the user to find out what commands and events have to be
specified in its low-level interface. [#warnuseboth]_

While the wizard interface is used to define tasks and conditions, there is
another utility, named the **When Wizard Manager**, which can be used for
several tasks, including the removal of *actions* (tasks surrounded by
circumstances) that are no more needed, viewing the history of past actions
in a simplified way and some environment tuning. Thanks to the modular,
extensible nature of the **When Wizard** suite, the manager application can
also be used to install plugins for actions that are not available by default
in the distribution.

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_man01.png

This chapter's intent is to give a brief introduction to the **When Wizard**
suite: apart from some specific **When Wizard Manager** configuration options
the interface is designed to be as intuitive as possible, and the actions
are documented in the interface.


Installation
============

At the moment, there is no proper installation procedure nor distribution
specific package. However getting the **When Wizard** to work is quite easy
anyway: it is sufficient to either clone the GitHub repository_ or download
and unpack the zip_ file from the master branch. It may be useful to move
the resulting directory (and maybe rename it in case the zip file has been
used) in a folder where applications reside. Assuming that the zip file
method was chosen and that the ``when-wizard-master.zip`` file is now in
``~/Downloads``:

::

  ~$ mkdir Apps     # or another name you might like
  ~$ cd Downloads
  ~/Downloads$ unzip when-wizard-master.zip
  ~/Downloads$ mv when-wizard-master ../Apps/when-wizard
  ~/Downloads$ cd ..
  ~$

or any equivalent combination of operations from the graphical shell. To
start the **When Wizard** is now sufficient to

::

  ~$ cd Apps/when-wizard
  ~/Apps/when-wizard$ ./when-wizard start-wizard

while for the manager application, the subcommand changes:

::

  ~$ cd Apps/when-wizard
  ~/Apps/when-wizard$ ./when-wizard start-manager

.. Note::

  The ``when-wizard`` command is already marked as *executable* in the
  repository, however, should the shell refuse to execute the command,
  it is sufficient to ``cd`` to the installation directory and issue
  ``chmod a+x when-wizard``; the same yields for all the scripts stored
  in the ``share/when-wizard/scripts`` subdirectory.

Using the **When Wizard Manager** it is possible to create icons for both
the wizard and the management application: once the **When Wizard Manager**
started, choose the *Utility* tab and click on the check box labeled
*Create or Restore Icons for Wizard Applications*, then click the *Apply*
button:

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_man02.png

The icons for **When Wizard** and for the **When Wizard Manager** should
now be available in the *Dash* or whatever menu system is used.

.. _repository: https://github.com/almostearthling/when-wizard.git
.. _zip: https://github.com/almostearthling/when-wizard/archive/master.zip


Defining Actions
================

Action definition is simple, but there are many different choices for tasks
and surrounding conditions to be described in detail. However, whenever a
task or a condition is chosen in the list proposed by the wizard interface,
descriptive text is provided along with the name of the item, and in the
lower part of the form a longer description appears that better specifies
what has been selected:

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_wiz02.png

Task and condition items are grouped in categories and types, which can be
chosen from the drop-down list at the beginning of the window. The interface
proposes to decide what task has to be accomplished and *then* to define the
circumstances under which it should happen. Most items have to be configured
and after their selection a simple configuration page is presented to the
user:

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_wiz03.png

The configuration page depends obviously on the selected item. Once the task
and circumstance have been chosen and possibly configured, by clicking the
*Forward* button it is possible to review the action details:

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_wiz04.png

here the user is still in time to change her or his mind and either modify
anything or completely abort the operation by pressing the *Esc* key (or just
closing the window). If the *Forward* button is clicked, the action is
registered in **When**.


Managing Actions
================

Actions can be removed through the **When Wizard Manager** application. On
startup it shows a list containing the actions currently defined using the
wizard interface: [#whenleftalone]_

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_man03.png

To remove an action it is sufficient to select it from the list (a more
detailed description is shown under the list) and click the *Delete* button.
After confirmation, the action is completely removed from the system.

If the user only wants to suspend checks and consequences for an action, the
first page of the manager application also gives the possibility to just
*disable* (and possibly *reenable*) a previously defined action: selecting
the appropriate line in the list (enabled actions are marked with a green
circle containing a tick mark) and clicking the *Disable* button causes the
action to be ineffective without deleting it. It can be enabled again at a
later time when needed, by just selecting it and clicking the *Enable*
button.


Other Uses for the When Wizard Manager
======================================

There are some more uses for the manager application, organized in pages:

* visualization of action history
* **When Wizard** plugin management
* third-party provided *item sets* management
* tuning of the underlying **When** scheduler instance.

History visualization is quite trivial: each history record is shown as a
line in the visible list, prefixed with startup time and duration of the
related action. The tuning and utility page (the one that can be used to
create or restore icons too) also does not need a lot of explaination: it
just allows to adopt a set of options for **When** that let it better blend
with a wizard based usage, including activation of user-defined events and
file monitoring, and *Minimalistic Mode* for the applet indicator icon.
Settings forced through this page are permanent and can only be reset from
the *Settings* dialog box in the main **When** interface. Maybe it's worth
to mention that the so-called *lazy mode* is lazy indeed, and in some cases
the time between the conditional event and its consequence can be more than
six minutes: it is mainly useful when the computer is left alone most of
the time while performing tasks (for example: data collection, or very big
downloads and so on), while for other configurations *normal reactivity* is
possibly the suitable setting -- which corresponds to the default values
in **When** configuration.

The existence of a *plugin management* page reflects one important aspect
of the **When Wizard** application: functionality can be extended through
add-ons. Such add-ons (or *plugins*, as they are named in the UI) provide
ways to encapsulate common tasks and to grant access to system events and
environmental conditions in a simple way: the user might need to configure
a small number of options in many cases, and in some cases not even that.
*Plugins* can be downloaded in packaged form, and installed and removed
from the manager interface.

.. Warning::

  Particular care must be taken when installing a plugin: plugins should
  only be installed from trusted sources much in the same way as software
  packages. In fact, although plugin code is never run with administrator
  privileges, a plugin may install scripts that have access to valuable
  information.

*Plugins* come packaged with a ``.wwpz`` extension: if the user writes
by himself the path to the package in the appropriate text entry, she or he
can use whatever file specification. If the file chooser dialog box is used
only files with the ``.wwpz`` extension will be shown. Plugins can also be
removed, but *only if there is no action using them*: to remove a plugin
one has to make sure that all related actions have been removed too.

Last but not least, the *Import* page of the **When Wizard Manager** offers
the possibility to import preconfigured **When** items via provided
*Item Definition Files*. Such files can contain single items as well as
item sets, and in fact some third-party defined actions might come packaged
in an *Item Definition File*. Files of this type should have a ``.widf``
extension, but the same considerations yield as for the ``.wwpz`` files.

Some plugins (namely, the ones that depend on user defined events) may
require that the user imports an *Item Definition File*. Such cases should
be well documented and the developer should provide both the plugin package
and the supporting *Item Definition File*.


.. [#warnuseboth] If you want to use *both* types of interface, avoid names
  beginning with the ``00wiz99_`` prefix for *tasks*, *conditions* and
  *signal handlers* when using the **When** base interface: this sequence
  is used by the wizard to identify its own items. It is otherwise perfectly
  legal and can be used if you plan to use **When** alone.
.. [#whenleftalone] Other actions directly defined in **When** are left
  untouched by the **When Wizard Manager**: of course it is advisable to
  choose one and only one interface for **When** and avoid its base UI if
  the wizard approach is chosen, but in this way it is anyway possible to
  avoid that the wizard interface could mess up a configuration made at
  lower level, for example using third party *item definition files*.

Commit message:

Parametric IDF dialog box described

wizard.rst, after:

===============
The When Wizard
===============

The **When Wizard** is a suite of utilities that aim at providing an easier
user interface for a rich subset of **When**'s capabilities, in order to
give to end users with lesser interest in programming and scripting the
possibility to use the **When** scheduler to perform simple but useful
tasks. In fact, the use of **When** as it is assumes a certain knowledge
of the command shell, including its constructs and peculiarities, which is
somehow in contrast with the GUI nature of the applet itself.

.. Warning::

  This section refers to software in its early development stage: it may
  contain bugs and errors, and it might be subject to changes in both
  appearance and functionality. The documentation will be kept as updated
  as possible, however there might be a gap sometimes between updates to
  the software and related documentation changes.

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_wiz01.png

As the name suggests, the main **When Wizard** application presents itself
with a *wizard* styled interface, which allows to define what has to be done
and the circumstances under which it has to happen in a more intuitive
step-by-step fashion. **When** is still used to do most of the job, that is
scheduling checks, listening to events and performing tasks when the
conditions are met, but the wizard instructs it on how to behave instead
of requiring the user to find out what commands and events have to be
specified in its low-level interface. [#warnuseboth]_

While the wizard interface is used to define tasks and conditions, there is
another utility, named the **When Wizard Manager**, which can be used for
several tasks, including the removal of *actions* (tasks surrounded by
circumstances) that are no more needed, viewing the history of past actions
in a simplified way and some environment tuning. Thanks to the modular,
extensible nature of the **When Wizard** suite, the manager application can
also be used to install plugins for actions that are not available by default
in the distribution.

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_man01.png

This chapter's intent is to give a brief introduction to the **When Wizard**
suite: apart from some specific **When Wizard Manager** configuration options
the interface is designed to be as intuitive as possible, and the actions
are documented in the interface.


Installation
============

At the moment, there is no proper installation procedure nor distribution
specific package. However getting the **When Wizard** to work is quite easy
anyway: it is sufficient to either clone the GitHub repository_ or download
and unpack the zip_ file from the master branch. It may be useful to move
the resulting directory (and maybe rename it in case the zip file has been
used) in a folder where applications reside. Assuming that the zip file
method was chosen and that the ``when-wizard-master.zip`` file is now in
``~/Downloads``:

::

  ~$ mkdir Apps     # or another name you might like
  ~$ cd Downloads
  ~/Downloads$ unzip when-wizard-master.zip
  ~/Downloads$ mv when-wizard-master ../Apps/when-wizard
  ~/Downloads$ cd ..
  ~$

or any equivalent combination of operations from the graphical shell. To
start the **When Wizard** is now sufficient to

::

  ~$ cd Apps/when-wizard
  ~/Apps/when-wizard$ ./when-wizard start-wizard

while for the manager application, the subcommand changes:

::

  ~$ cd Apps/when-wizard
  ~/Apps/when-wizard$ ./when-wizard start-manager

.. Note::

  The ``when-wizard`` command is already marked as *executable* in the
  repository, however, should the shell refuse to execute the command,
  it is sufficient to ``cd`` to the installation directory and issue
  ``chmod a+x when-wizard``; the same yields for all the scripts stored
  in the ``share/when-wizard/scripts`` subdirectory.

Using the **When Wizard Manager** it is possible to create icons for both
the wizard and the management application: once the **When Wizard Manager**
started, choose the *Utility* tab and click on the check box labeled
*Create or Restore Icons for Wizard Applications*, then click the *Apply*
button:

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_man02.png

The icons for **When Wizard** and for the **When Wizard Manager** should
now be available in the *Dash* or whatever menu system is used.

.. _repository: https://github.com/almostearthling/when-wizard.git
.. _zip: https://github.com/almostearthling/when-wizard/archive/master.zip


Defining Actions
================

Action definition is simple, but there are many different choices for tasks
and surrounding conditions to be described in detail. However, whenever a
task or a condition is chosen in the list proposed by the wizard interface,
descriptive text is provided along with the name of the item, and in the
lower part of the form a longer description appears that better specifies
what has been selected:

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_wiz02.png

Task and condition items are grouped in categories and types, which can be
chosen from the drop-down list at the beginning of the window. The interface
proposes to decide what task has to be accomplished and *then* to define the
circumstances under which it should happen. Most items have to be configured
and after their selection a simple configuration page is presented to the
user:

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_wiz03.png

The configuration page depends obviously on the selected item. Once the task
and circumstance have been chosen and possibly configured, by clicking the
*Next* button it is possible to review the action details:

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_wiz04.png

here the user is still in time to change her or his mind and either modify
anything or completely abort the operation by pressing the *Esc* key (or just
closing the window). If the *Next* button is clicked, the action is
registered in **When**.


Managing Actions
================

Actions can be removed through the **When Wizard Manager** application. On
startup it shows a list containing the actions currently defined using the
wizard interface: [#whenleftalone]_

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_man03.png

To remove an action it is sufficient to select it from the list (a more
detailed description is shown under the list) and click the *Delete* button.
After confirmation, the action is completely removed from the system.

If the user only wants to suspend checks and consequences for an action, the
first page of the manager application also gives the possibility to just
*disable* (and possibly *reenable*) a previously defined action: selecting
the appropriate line in the list (enabled actions are marked with a green
circle containing a tick mark) and clicking the *Disable* button causes the
action to be ineffective without deleting it. It can be enabled again at a
later time when needed, by just selecting it and clicking the *Enable*
button.


Other Uses for the When Wizard Manager
======================================

There are some more uses for the manager application, organized in pages:

* visualization of action history
* **When Wizard** plugin management
* third-party provided *item sets* management
* tuning of the underlying **When** scheduler instance.

History visualization is quite trivial: each history record is shown as a
line in the visible list, prefixed with startup time and duration of the
related action. The tuning and utility page (the one that can be used to
create or restore icons too) also does not need a lot of explaination: it
just allows to adopt a set of options for **When** that let it better blend
with a wizard based usage, including activation of user-defined events and
file monitoring, and *Minimalistic Mode* for the applet indicator icon.
Settings forced through this page are permanent and can only be reset from
the *Settings* dialog box in the main **When** interface. Maybe it's worth
to mention that the so-called *lazy mode* is lazy indeed, and in some cases
the time between the conditional event and its consequence can be more than
six minutes: it is mainly useful when the computer is left alone most of
the time while performing tasks (for example: data collection, or very big
downloads and so on), while for other configurations *normal reactivity* is
possibly the suitable setting -- which corresponds to the default values
in **When** configuration.

The existence of a *plugin management* page reflects one important aspect
of the **When Wizard** application: functionality can be extended through
add-ons. Such add-ons (or *plugins*, as they are named in the UI) provide
ways to encapsulate common tasks and to grant access to system events and
environmental conditions in a simple way: the user might need to configure
a small number of options in many cases, and in some cases not even that.
*Plugins* can be downloaded in packaged form, and installed and removed
from the manager interface.

.. Warning::

  Particular care must be taken when installing a plugin: plugins should
  only be installed from trusted sources much in the same way as software
  packages. In fact, although plugin code is never run with administrator
  privileges, a plugin may install scripts that have access to valuable
  information.

*Plugins* come packaged with a ``.wwpz`` extension: if the user writes
by himself the path to the package in the appropriate text entry, she or he
can use whatever file specification. If the file chooser dialog box is used
only files with the ``.wwpz`` extension will be shown. Plugins can also be
removed, but *only if there is no action using them*: to remove a plugin
one has to make sure that all related actions have been removed too.

Last but not least, the *Import* page of the **When Wizard Manager** offers
the possibility to import preconfigured **When** items via provided
*Item Definition Files*. Such files can contain single items as well as
item sets, and in fact some third-party defined actions might come packaged
in an *Item Definition File*. Files of this type should have a ``.widf``
extension, but the same considerations yield as for the ``.wwpz`` files.

In some cases *Item Definition Files* might require some configuration by
the user: if so, when the *Execute* button is pressed, a dialog box is
shown that gives the possibility to modify some parameters.

.. image:: _static/when-wizard_paramidf2.png

The parameters should have been documented by who provided the file, and
might be subject to checks to verify their correctness at confirmation time.

Some plugins (namely, the ones that depend on user defined events) may
require that the user imports an *Item Definition File*. Such cases should
be well documented and the developer should provide both the plugin package
and the supporting *Item Definition File*.


.. [#warnuseboth] If you want to use *both* types of interface, avoid names
  beginning with the ``00wiz99_`` prefix for *tasks*, *conditions* and
  *signal handlers* when using the **When** base interface: this sequence
  is used by the wizard to identify its own items. It is otherwise perfectly
  legal and can be used if you plan to use **When** alone.
.. [#whenleftalone] Other actions directly defined in **When** are left
  untouched by the **When Wizard Manager**: of course it is advisable to
  choose one and only one interface for **When** and avoid its base UI if
  the wizard approach is chosen, but in this way it is anyway possible to
  avoid that the wizard interface could mess up a configuration made at
  lower level, for example using third party *item definition files*.
